 
Discover 
Articles 
Recommendations 
My Profile 
Advanced Search 
Facebook
Twitter
Tumblr
RSS
Sign Up 
|
Log in 
 
photo credit: Kharen Hill 

 
Play Sarah McLachlan
on Amazon Music 
 
Active
1980s - 2010s
Born 
January 28, 1968 in Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada 
Genre
Pop/Rock
Styles
Adult Alternative Pop/Rock
Alternative Pop/Rock
Contemporary Singer/Songwriter
Alternative/Indie Rock
Contemporary Pop/Rock
Also Known As
Sarah Ann McLachlan 
Sarah Maclachlan 
Submit Corrections 

Related Blog Posts
Radio on the TV: Performances from Coldplay, Rodrigo y Gabriela, Pharrell and More 
New Releases Roundup: May 6 
 
Sarah McLachlan 
Biography by Chris Woodstra 
+ Follow Artist
Canadian writer of deeply emotional songs and founder of Lilith Fair, who first gained a cult following then became a hitmaker in the 1990s. 
Read Full Biography 
Overview 
Biography 
Discography 
Songs 
Credits 
Awards 
Related 
Share on 
facebook 
twitter 
tumblr 

Artist Biography by Chris Woodstra 
Canadian singer/songwriter Sarah McLachlan debuted in 1988 with her piano-based folk-pop, which went on to gain her a devoted following, a number of Juno and Grammy Awards, and placement in the Canadian Music Hall of Fame. She also founded Lilith Fair, a concert tour that helped usher other female songwriters into the mainstream during the late '90s, while maintaining her own presence on the charts. 


McLachlan was born on January 28, 1968, in Halifax, Nova Scotia, where she began taking lessons for voice, classical piano, and guitar as a child. Following a year of art training at the Nova Scotia School of Design, McLachlan (who had also been fronting a new wave band named October Game) was approached by Nettwerk Records and offered a solo deal. She initially turned it down in favor of continued studies; however, she reconsidered and accepted the offer in late 1987, relocating to Vancouver soon after. On the strength of her debut, 1988's Touch, the budding songwriter was signed to Arista for international distribution. The album eventually reached gold status in Canada and was reissued worldwide in 1989. In 1991, she followed up with Solace, an impressive collection that showed a great leap in songcraft and began to build a strong cult following in the U.S. 



In September 1992, following a 14-month promotional tour, McLachlan traveled to Cambodia and Thailand to work on World Vision, a Canadian-sponsored documentary on poverty and child prostitution. Inspired by her experiences, she retreated to a secluded house outside of Montreal to write material for her next album. After six months in a Montreal studio with collaborator/producer Pierre Marchand, she released Fumbling Toward Ecstasy, her strongest and most personal effort to date, in late 1993. The album peaked in the U.S. charts at number 50; by the end of 1994, it reached platinum status after spending 62 weeks on the chart. "Possession," an atmospheric single that mixed electronica influences with lyrics inspired by a stalker, broke the Top 100 and received considerable airplay, especially on modern rock radio, where it peaked at number 14. "Good Enough" also found a home in that format, reaching number 16. The Freedom Sessions, consisting mainly of alternate versions of tracks from Fumbling, arrived in 1995; that same year also saw the release of "I Will Remember You," which McLachlan wrote as the theme for Brothers McMullen. Rarities, B-Sides & Other Stuff, a collection of non-LP tracks and remixes, was issued in Canada in 1996. 



In 1997, McLachlan began work on her fourth album, the enormously successful Surfacing, which debuted at number two on the pop albums chart. She also organized Lilith Fair, a package tour focusing on emerging women singer/songwriters. Released in 1999, the multi-platinum Mirrorball chronicled McLachlan's performances on that tour and served as her first live release. In 2003, after a short hiatus from the business, she put out the successful Afterglow, followed by another concert release, Afterglow Live. Both releases eventually went multi-platinum, and McLachlan continued to tour through 2005. In June of that year, she performed on the Philadelphia stage of Live 8, the multi-city anniversary celebration of Live Aid and G8 summit protest coordinated by Live Aid founder Bob Geldof. She released Bloom, her second remix collection, several months later. While most of its material was drawn from Afterglow, it also included a version of the 1989 McLachlan track "Vox" and a previously unreleased collaboration with DMC and Black Eyed Peas' will.i.am. 



McLachlan released two albums in 2006: Mirrorball: The Complete Concert, which captured the entirety of the last date on her 1998 tour, and Wintersong, a collection of traditional and modern Christmas covers (plus one new song, the title cut). She then returned to original material for 2010's Laws of Illusion, her first studio album in nearly seven years. Featuring "One Dream," which she wrote for the 2009 Vancouver Winter Olympics Opening Ceremony, the album was released several weeks before the start of Lilith Fair 2010, the festival's first appearance in more than a decade. McLachlan spent the next couple of years focusing on her charitable endeavor The Sarah McLachlan School of Music, which provided free music lessons to at-risk kids in Vancouver. She returned to the studio in 2013 to record a new album with longtime collaborator Pierre Marchand, inspired by the recent death of her father. Parting ways with Arista, her label home for more than 20 years, she signed to Verve. She released Shine On, her first album for the label and another collaboration with Pierre Marchand, in May of 2014. Shine On debuted at number one on the Canadian charts and number four in the U.S.; it would win the Juno for Best Adult Contemporary Album. In October 2016, McLachlan released Wonderland, her second Christmas album. The following year, she was inducted into the Canadian Music Hall of Fame. 